what is going on everyone my name is
Kota moore and welcome back to
electronics episode 24 in this episode
we will be covering integrated circuits
and specifically the 555 timer
integrated circuit today and I'm very
very very excited to be making this
episode because today we are finished
with all the boring stuff that we just
learned in the previous tutorials we are
taking our very first steps into the
things that we're going to need to
really really know in making an 8-bit
computer this is going to be really
exciting so let's get to it now in IC is
short for an integrated circuit and it
is a circuit that is packaged on or
essentially placed within a very very
small piece of semiconductive material
or more basically it is a circuit that
is made to be very very small
now most I sees that you're going to see
look either like this or this here now
this first I see that you can see here
is an integrated circuit that has zip
packaging or dual inline package ngey IP
basically it has pins as you can see
here that can be easily accessed and
placed into a breadboard for example and
the other common type of IC packaging is
called surface mount packaging and that
is what you can see right here now these
are both the exact same IC just there in
different packaging and surface mount
packages like this chip right here are
usually used more at the production
level for mass-produced circuits rather
than prototyping because the pins are so
much smaller now because of this any IC
that you purchase for the most part will
likely want to be a dual inline package
IC or it should look something like this
with the longer pins that you're able to
easily access input into a breadboard
now ICS have many different functions of
course they all do something completely
different it will be discussing many of
them as we go on with this tutorial
series
but one of the most popular ICS that you
should first learn about in electronics
is probably going to be the 5 5 5 timer
IC or the triple 5 timer and this IC has
been used for many many years and it has
many different uses but today we will be
using it to create an oscillating
circuit like we did in the previous
video however it'll be much more
controllable accurate and stable
compared to the circuit that we built
last time now the triple 5 timer IC
which I have right here as well as the
previous two ICS that you just saw has
eight pins in this example you can see
four of them on
front here and there are also for them
on the other side of this now whenever
you are working with an IC the pins are
numbered and they are numbered
counterclockwise starting at the upper
left pin and you can tell what pin is
the upper left because every IC will
usually have a small little indentation
like this one does right here at the
upper left so we know that this is pin
number one or if that's not the case
it'll have a little indentation on the
top part right here which you can kind
of see right there and that indicates
the top of the chip so that we know this
pin should be number one as well and
this IC just happens to have both of
those they both example and the little
dot here but some ICS may only have one
of those they all look a little bit
different and like I said the pins on an
IC are numbered counterclockwise so in
the case of a five five five timer pin
one is connected to ground or
essentially the negative terminal of
your battery and pin eight is called VCC
here or essentially where you're going
to connect the positive terminal of your
battery to now in the case of most other
ICS the bottom-left pin will usually be
your ground pin while the upper right
pin will usually be your VCC or your
positive terminal pin but of course all
ICS are different so it's very important
to have the data sheet for the IC that
you are working with in front you to
know what all the pins mean and what
they should be connected to for example
if you accidentally connect VCC and
ground backwards you could badly damage
the IC chip so I know the names of each
one of these pins just because I looked
at the data sheet for the 555 timer now
I'm going to begin by drawing out the
circuit building it and I'm seeing it
work and then I will go through a very
detailed explanation of how everything
works in the triple v timer now we are
going to use the triple v timer today
and what is called a stable mode and the
triple v timer can go in three modes you
have a stable monostable and then i'm
going to write the other one down here
there's also by stable mode as well so
we are going to be making a circuit that
runs the triple v timer in a stable mode
meaning that the output pin will be a
constant cycle so essentially from the
output pin here that is where our
oscillation is going to be it's going to
be off for a few seconds it'll turn on
for a few seconds off again on again off
again on again
in the square wave pattern and of course
it's going to do that automatically just
like the circuit we built in the last
video now it can also be run in what is
called mono stable mode where some sort
of trigger like a button press will
cause the output to go on and then off
for a set amount of time and there is
also by stable mode but we won't be
talking about monostable or by a stable
mode at this moment we are just going to
make a circuit that closely resembles
the circuit that we had in the last
video but of course is going to be much
better and more accurate and stable so
let me begin by drawing the schematic
diagram here first we're going to start
out with our battery this is of course
the positive terminal of the battery and
that will be hooked up to VCC and from
the positive terminal of the battery we
will have a resistor here and I'll give
you the values of these resistors in
just a few moments and that resistor
will be connected to pin number seven or
the discharge pin of the IC and from
there after that resistor we will have
another resistor hooked up here and this
resistor will be connected to that's the
rush hold pin pin number six of the five
five five timer and I should actually
probably label this IC that way we know
what it is
the five five five timer and from here
we will actually have this go to the
trigger pin pin number two of the IC and
we will also have it go to a capacitor
right here and that capacitor the other
side will just be connected to ground
I'm just going to write GND that way I
don't have to make a connection all the
way up to the negative terminal of the
battery great now the control voltage
pin number five is just going to have a
capacitor on it and that capacitor will
be connected to ground as well the reset
pin pin number four is going to be
connected directly to the positive
terminal of the battery or VCC again
instead of making a wire connection up
there I'm just going to write VCC so
that we know where it goes ground will
of course be connected to the negative
terminal of the battery here and then we
will have our output pin which actually
has our oscillating signal and we'll
connect that to a different circuit like
a blinking light or something so
actually let's have this output pin jump
over this wire and we can just lead this
on up to I don't know say a resistor
here and that resistor will just lead to
an LED so that we can get a blinking
light and the LED will be
connected to the negative terminal of
the battery so I know this is a really
messy schematic symbol but this is what
we want to build on our breadboard now
this capacitor right here connected to
control voltage I make that a zero point
one nano farad capacitor really this can
be any value capacitor but you probably
just want a very small value so don't
worry too much about the actual value of
this one now for this other capacitor
here as you can see I drew an
electrolytic symbol here because I want
a slightly larger value you can use a
value such as a 100 micro farad
capacitor in my case I'm going to be
using a 470 micro farad capacitor and
essentially the larger the capacitance
value right here the lower your
frequency is going to be or essentially
your light is going to blink slower with
the larger the capacitance that you have
so you can experiment around and try
different values for this capacitor here
if you would like and then the two
resistors will actually will make them
4.7 K ohm resistors so this one will
also be a 4.7 K ohm resistor as well
again you don't have to use exact values
it can be a bit different of course and
I should probably mention that I will be
using a nine volt power source which
means that your resistor over here will
have to be of a large enough value that
where your LED won't burn out so in my
case I'm just going to approximate I'm
just going to use a 1 kilo ohm resistor
here because I'm just assuming that
that's not going to make my LED burn out
or anything it should resist enough
electricity for that all to work so
there we go that is what we will be
using to make our circuit let's build it
run it and then we will go into full-on
in-depth explanation about it so I'm not
going to go through and build the entire
circuit on camera you should be able to
see most of the connections here all I
have to do is add two more resistors in
this circuit will be completed along
with our schematic that we made as you
can see I have my 470 micro farad
capacitor my point 1 nano farad
capacitor like I said this one isn't
required but you probably want to have
it it's good practice to do so I have my
triple 5 timer chip and if i zoom into
it a bit more here you should be able to
slightly see on the top here there's a
little indent and I'm sorry that it's
hard to see on the camera but that is
how I know it's the top of the chip and
that this pin is the upper-left pin or
pin number one so it's important that
you make sure that your triple 5 timer
chip is oriented the proper
direction and the same goes for
everything like the LED make sure that
sucked up correctly I have my resistor
here
everything should be hooked up properly
let me just go ahead and I'm going to
take my two four point seven kilo ohm
resistors one is going to go from pin
eight to pin seven and you want to make
sure that you don't have any weird
connections touching each other
accidentally and the next is going to go
from pin seven to pin number six so let
me put that in right now as well so my
circuit looks very very message
especially up here that's probably why
you're going to want to spread out all
your connections a bit more so who has
time for that I certainly don't
so let's actually hook up the power and
get this thing running so once I connect
to the 9-volt battery the LED instantly
turns on and then after a couple of
seconds it should turn off breath and
it'll turn back on as you can see and
it's going to continue to blink and
later on in this video I show you how to
calculate the frequency of how this
light is turning on and off but anyways
this is the circuit in action so let's
go into an explanation of all of this
now this is probably going to be the
biggest explanation that I have ever
done this far in this series there is a
lot of stuff that I have to explain here
and there's also a lot of things within
the triple five timer that we haven't
talked about yet that I also have to
explain now it can be a really tricky
thing to understand so if you get really
really confused don't worry about it
follow along with the series maybe come
back to this video it can be quite tough
to understand and I'm going to try my
best to explain it the best I possibly
can now there's a thing within the
triple five timer called a flip-flop
I've drawn it so that it looks kind of
like a switch but it's really not a
physical switch in the triple five timer
but I just drew it that way because it's
easier to show how it functions so there
isn't an actual physical switch within
here second of all we see that there are
these two little triangle things in here
and those two triangle things are called
comparators right here we have not
talked about comparators yet so let's do
a brief little introduction into what
the comparators are going to be doing
within the triple five timer so we have
two inputs the top is called the V plus
input the bottom is called the V minus
input and then coming out of a tip of
the triangle we have the output signal
and actually before I continue on with
this explanation I have to explain two
words that I'm going to be used
throughout the remainder of this series
I'm going to be using the words hi and
I'm also going to be using the word lo
quite a bit whenever I say hi it means
that there is voltage we are connected
to the positive rail it's sending out
voltage on this wire or this is
essentially equivalent to the number one
meaning we do have voltage whenever I
use the word lo I mean we don't have any
voltage or we're connected to ground
zero volts in fact and this is also
equivalent to the number zero you'll see
that a lot so hi we are sending out
voltage on whatever wire we're talking
about low means we are not sending out
voltage instead we are connected to
ground on that wire those are two very
important words that we're going to be
using throughout the remainder of this
series hi is voltage low is no voltage
or ground
okay back to comparators right here now
I've written down exactly what happens
here in these two lines so what we are
saying is that the output signal here
the output will be high or it will
connect to VCC to positive voltage and
it will send out positive voltage only
if the V Plus input is greater than the
V minus input so if we have more voltage
coming into the plus input than we do
coming into the minus input then the
output will become high and it will send
out positive voltage for us however and
I also have this written down next to it
over here the output will be low or
connected to ground if the V Plus input
is less than to the minus input so if
the voltage coming into the plus input
is less than the voltage coming into the
minus input the output will be low
connect to ground that is what a
comparator does and I'm going to leave
this text on the screen right up here
that way that you can refer to it as I
am explaining things because it is a
very key part of the triple v timer of
course now that those basic explanations
are out of the way let's get to how this
is working so the first thing that we
are going to notice is that the VCC and
ground pins are connected by three
resistors in series here and these three
resistors actually split up our input
voltage so go to comparator a here is
going to be one third of our supply
by voltage one third of our VCC while
this wire going down to comparator B to
the minus input is going to be two
thirds of our input voltage two-thirds
of our VCC now I used a 9-volt battery
so instead of writing that I'm just
going to say that constantly we are
getting to the plus input of this
comparator three volts because that is
one third of my nine volt supply into
the minus input of the B comparator we
are getting six volts because that is
two thirds of my power supply and that's
pretty much going to stay constant we
will always be comparing something to
three volts here in something to six
volts down here now really the only
tough part that I have to explain is
this control voltage pin here which as
you can see is also connected to this
minus input basically don't worry about
this control voltage pin for now because
all in all it's pretty much just
connected to ground constantly and the
only reason that we have this capacitor
here is just to smooth out the input
that way we have a nice smooth voltage
going into this comparator that's the
only reason we have this capacitor here
and the control voltage pin also helps
set the sensitivity of the triple v
timer but again for this basic
explanation and because we just have
this connected to ground essentially
imagine that this control voltage pin is
doing nothing so we're just comparing
something to six volts here and trust me
that isn't going to hurt my explanation
when we first start up this triple v
timer what happens well we have from the
VCC pin traveling through this resistor
here and electricity instead of
traveling down here it has an easier
path to travel it will actually choose
to go through the discharge pin instead
and go directly to ground because
through the flip-flop here that switch
is connected to ground to begin with so
electricity is basically just going to
go from the positive to ground and it's
just going to skip this entire part
right here because it's an easier path
so if that is happening then we
basically just have a ground signal
traveling over on to the trigger input
pin so we have going to this negative
input of the a comparator zero volts
because it's connected to ground so
let's look at our comparator settings up
here what will this comparator output
well the
plus input is greater than the v- input
three volts is greater than zero volts
that means that the output of the
comparator in letter a that means that
the output of comparator a will be high
or it will send out voltage and whenever
we get a high output out of comparator a
the switches of the flip-flop are going
to switch to their down position so this
switch right here is going to move down
here to a no connection while this
to positive power instead of ground so
we flip the switches downward in this
flip-flop because the comparator letter
a is sending out a highest signal okay
so when we start up the triple five
timer essentially what happens is our
output is almost instantly connected to
positive power our output goes high so
our output is high so what happens after
all of this takes place well let's go
back to the start again we have coming
from positive power VCC through a
resistor except remember that the
flip-flop is in the down state right now
so electricity isn't going to travel
through the discharged pin any more
because it is no longer connected to
ground it's connected to nothing so it
has nowhere to travel to so instead
it'll continue to travel through this
resistor here and it will begin to
charge up this capacitor right here so
for a certain amount of time as this
capacitor is charging up we will
essentially have going through this
threshold pin to the positive input of
the D comparator zero volts and then
after maybe a very short amount of time
depending upon the capacitor and
resistor values it will climb up to one
volt and then after a little bit more
time it'll climb up to maybe two volts
and then three volts and because the V
Plus input is less than the V minus
input now because remember V minus is at
six volts two-thirds of our supply
voltage our output of this comparator
stays low so the switches aren't going
to switch to up because the output is
low it's not activating the flip-flop so
our output is essentially stuck at the
high output for so long and it's going
to be stuck there until the input of our
comparator the plus
put reaches just over six volts so for
example purposes I'm going to write
seven volts but in reality it's just
going to be a tiny tiny amount over six
volts now the second that that happens
comparator B is going to output a high
signal because now v+ is greater than v
- so since we have a high signal going
to the switch-up portion of our
flip-flop these switches that are in the
down position are going to flip back to
their up position again so let me go
ahead and just remove all these lines
here that I have drawn now these
switches are back in their up position
because we had a high signal come to the
switch up input so because that all took
time to happen because this capacitor
was charging up to get to that voltage
greater than 6 volt our output stayed
high at VCC for some amount of time and
it just switched back to its ground
connection again so now our output has
gone low so now what's going to happen
again let's begin at the beginning and
see what is happening now from VCC we
have power going through this resistor
but now it has that easy path again it
will go through the discharge pin to
ground because that's an easier path for
it to take to travel because our
capacitor is about two-thirds of the way
charged up it's at about 6 volts it's
going to begin to discharge and it will
start to discharge basically through the
trigger input right here through the
minus sign of this a comparator right
here so it's going to begin at 6 volts
well in this case v+ is less than v - so
our comparator is going to output a low
signal so it's not going to make the
switches go down just yet but slowly
over time the capacitor is going to
discharge it will go down to 5 volts
it'll slowly go down to 4 volts and once
it gets barely below 3 volts again for
example purposes I'm just going to write
2 volts to make it simple once it gets
below 3 volts over that short amount of
time comparator a is going to output a
high signal because now the plus is
greater than V minus again so we're less
than one-third of our supply voltage
it's going to make the switches flip to
their down position once more so our
output was at ground
or low for a little bit of time now it
just switched back to high again in this
cycle is going to repeat so at this
point in our circuit the discharge pin
is now in the down position connected to
nothing so it'll begin to recharge this
capacitor right here and it will charge
it until it's just over two thirds of
our supply voltage again and when that
happens this comparator will make the
switches go to their up position again
and the whole cycle is going to repeat
and because this all takes a bit of time
due to the resistors and the charging of
the capacitor which I'm going to explain
in just a few moments our output stays
connected to ground or low for some
amount of time and then it stays
connected to VCC or it stays high for a
little bit amount of time and it
switches back and forth between that
it's an alternating cycle so hopefully
that explanation got you through how
this triple v timer worked for us I'm
really hoping that I explained it well
enough if you have any questions at all
leave them down below in the comments I
or swimmin oats will try their best to
answer your question try to get you to
explain this the best we possibly can so
we have just a couple more things to
explain first of all reset is constantly
connected in our case to VCC basically
whenever a reset goes low so if we were
to connect reset to ground it's just
going to automatically force the
flip-flop to reset to the up position
and it'll stay in the up position until
our reset goes high again and it will
allow the triple five timer to function
again okay so how can we calculate the
frequency of our triple five timer well
there's a really neat equation that
someone created that we can figure that
out with basically we have frequency
equal to one point four four divided by
and I'm going to call this resistor a
right here and resistor B so we have
that divided by resistor a plus two
times the resistor amount of B all x and
we'll call the capacitance of this
capacitor C so we're going to multiply
that by the farad capacitance of that
right there so the frequency in the
circuit that I built is going to be one
point 4 4 divided by both of my
resistors were four point seven K ohms
so I have four thousand seven hundred
ohms plus two times four thousand seven
hundred ohms as well and then all of
that is multiplied by my 470 micro farad
capacitor so because I had 470 micro
farad's and we have to make this in the
fair I'd unit that is equivalent to zero
point zero zero zero four seven farads I
believe and actually I'm not going to
write that F in there just to make it
more readable so if I do the calculation
I should have the frequency that my
output was oscillating at so when I do
calculate that I get my frequency to
equal approximately zero point two one
seven Hertz which is abbreviated Hz and
that basically means how many times per
second is this cycle happening so I had
a very very slow oscillation because I
used such a big capacitance value so my
light wasn't even blinking on and off
once per second it was doing it even
slower than that but if we reduced the
capacitance value so if this value got
lower then our frequency would increase
or if these resistance values got lower
than our frequency would increase and it
would be faster and faster so you should
probably try and experiment around with
your resistor and capacitance values
there that way you can see all different
frequencies with your triple five timer
again I hope I explained this all well
enough for you guys any questions leave
them down below in the comments this is
really fun we are getting into the meat
and potatoes of this 8-bit computer
series now we just have to cover a few
more basic concepts until we actually
get into designing the 8-bit computer
thanks for watching everyone and I'll
see you guys in the next video